 CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
1
Password Policy 
 CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
2
1 Version history details and author
1.0 05/10/2010 Completed for distribution Jo White
2.0 27/10/2010 Approved by Information Governance Group Jo White
3.0 25/10/2011 Reviewed by Information Governance Group Jo White
4.0 28/11/2012 Reviewed by Information Governance Group Jo White
5.0 13/01/2014 Reviewed by Information Governance Group Jo White
6.0 03/11/2014 Reviewed by Information Governance Group Jo White
7.0 09/05/2016 Reviewed by Information Governance Group Jo White
8.0 12/06/2017 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. Jo White.
9.0 08/05/2018 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. Amendments
made to supply of passwords to new starters and account lockout thresholds. Jo
White
10.0 08/07/2019 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. Password length
increased to 12 characters, frequency of change to 90 days from 42. Jo White
11.0 09/03/2021 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. Password
frequency changed to 180 days. Jo White
12.0 06/08/2021 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. Jo White
13.0 04/10/2022 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. Removed
references to office. Addition of group logon advice.Jo White
14.0 10/10/2023 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. ISO27001
controls updated. Jo White
15.0 12/11/2024 Reviewed by Information Governance Group. MFA to be used
where possible. Jo Williams
This document has been prepared using the following ISO27001:2022 standard
controls as reference:
A.5.15 - Access control
A.5.16 - Identity management
A.5.17 - Authentication information
A.5.18 – Access rights
A.8.5 – Secure authentication
CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
3
2 Introduction
Passwords are an essential element of the Council’s network security - they are the
front line of protection for user accounts. A poorly chosen password may result in the
compromise of the Council's entire corporate network. As such, all Derbyshire
County Council employees, elected members, partner agencies, contractors,
volunteers and vendors with access to Council systems are responsible for taking the
appropriate steps, as outlined below, to select, use and secure their passwords.
3 Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to establish a standard for the creation of strong
passwords, the protection of those passwords and the frequency of change across all
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) related systems throughout the
Council.
4 Scope
This policy applies to all employees, elected members, contractors, volunteers,
vendors, agency staff and partner agencies who:
• have or are responsible for any network account or resources (or any form of
access that supports or requires a password) on any system that resides at
any Council facility.
• have access to the Council’s data network.
• store any personal, sensitive or confidential Council information.
5 Policy Statement
The continual reliance on IT systems, requires that effective password controls are in
place to ensure that the integrity of all system/access logon accounts used across
the Council is maintained. The following procedures and practices must be followed
to ensure the security and integrity of these accounts.
• All users must ensure that their password is not divulged or shared with
anyone else.
• All users must not create passwords that fall into the category of weak
passwords under the construction guidelines.
• All users must not write down and store passwords.
• Passwords must not be inserted into email messages or other forms of
electronic communication with the exception of some systems/processes
which may require automatically generated temporary passwords to be sent.
Temporary passwords must be changed as soon as possible.
• All ICT devices which may require local logon privileges for configuration and
maintenance i.e. Printers, network switches, routers, SAN appliances etc.
must all have the built-in default admin (or equivalent) account password
changed in line with the guidelines of this policy wherever possible.
Consideration should be given in the use of Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
wherever possible or appropriate
• All ICT systems should:
o Support individual user authentication – providing for identification of
specific users and not just groups. Where this cannot be achieved
(e.g. access to services designed for shared use) a shared password
must be stored in a single designated secure repository, accessible
only to the users who need it. These password sharing arrangements
must be regularly reviewed.
o Prevent the storing of passwords in clear text or in any easily
reversible form
CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
4
o Provide for management of specific roles and functions within a
system enabling delegation of tasks to individuals
o Not contain or utilise embedded (hard-coded) passwords – these are
passwords which are “fixed” (saved) on a computer or device and are
often “hidden” from view. Embedded passwords can be used as a
“back door” to computers and systems and must be prevented.
o Use access control procedures, which apply to both operational and
test systems equally.
This policy relates to both the internal and external Derbyshire domains to which
employees, elected members, contractors, volunteers, vendors and partner agencies
logon. Specific configuration of enforced password policies for each domain is as
follows:
5.1 Internal Users
The Council’s main network enables user logons and authentication. It is also the
security boundary for the majority of systems in use and accessed by Council
employees, elected members, partner agencies, contractors, volunteers and
vendors.
Password configuration enforced by the default domain group policy for this domain:
• Minimum password length 12 characters
• Users are prompted to change their password at first logon and 7 days prior
to the existing one expiring.
• Passwords must meet complexity requirements – this forces the use of
passwords which must contain at least four of the following five elements:
o Numeric – (0-9)
o Uppercase – (A-Z)
o Lowercase – (a-z)
o Special Characters (?,!, @, #, %, etc…)
o Spaces
5.2 External users
This area services external (3rd party) connections to the Council’s network and
facilitates external user logons and authentication. It is the security boundary placed
between the Internet and the Council’s internal network. This domain boundary is
used to contain user account logons for various parties including software support
and interim access.
Password configuration enforced by the default domain group policy for this domain:
• Minimum password length 12 characters
• Password must meet complexity requirements – detailed as above 5.1
All externally procured software must satisfy the requirement of this policy. The
Supplier Information Security Policyalso defines when externally procured software
and applications (Apps) must use Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) and/or single
sign on where possible.
5.3 Password Configuration Settings
CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
5
Detailed password configuration settings for IT Systems or applications purchased by
the Council will be supplied as part of the procurement process, where applicable.
6 Responsibilities
Implementation and adherence to this policy is the responsibility of all Council
employees, elected members, partner agencies, contractors, volunteers and vendors
working for the Council. It is important that every employee takes seriously, the use,
protection and integrity of their own password/s or any other system password/s
which they may be privy to from time to time and to encourage, guide and inform staff
wherever possible for those who are responsible for the supervision of others.
7 Compliance with legal and contractual obligations
• The Data Protection Act (2018) requires that personal data be kept secure
against unauthorised access or disclosure. The password is part of the
security environment.
• The Computer Misuse Act (1990) covers unauthorised access to computer
systems, including the use of another person’s identity. If a user “lends” their
account and password to another individual who then breaches the
Computer Misuse Act, both the individuals concerned could be deemed to
have committed an offence.
8 Breaches of Policy
Breaches of this policy and/or security incidents can be defined as events which
could have, or have resulted in, loss or damage to Council assets, or an event which
is in breach of the Council’s security procedures and policies.
All employees, elected members, partner agencies, contractors, volunteers and
vendors have a responsibility to report security incidents and breaches of this policy
as quickly as possible through the Council’s Incident Reporting Procedure. This
obligation also extends to any external organisation contracted to support or access
the Information Systems of the Council.
In the case of third party vendors, consultants or contractors, non-compliance could
result in the immediate removal of access to the system. If damage or compromise of
the Council’s ICT systems or network results from the non-compliance, the Council
will consider legal action against the third party. The Council will take appropriate
measures to remedy any breach of the policy through the relevant frameworks in
place. In the case of an individual the matter may be dealt with under the disciplinary
process.
9 General Password Construction Guidelines
Passwords are used for various purposes at Derbyshire County Council. Examples of
some of the more common uses include: user level accounts, web accounts, email
accounts, local access to ICT devices such as routers, printers etc. All staff should be
aware of how to construct and select strong passwords.
Strong passwords have the following characteristics:
• Contain both upper and lower case characters (e.g., a-z, A-Z)
• Have digits, punctuation and special characters as well as letters e.g., 0-9,
!@#$%^&*()_+|~-=\`{}[]:";'<>?,./)
• Are at least ten alphanumeric characters long.
• Are not a word in any language, slang, dialect, jargon, etc.
• Are not based on personal information, names of family, etc. 
CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
6
• Passwords should never be written down or stored online. Try to create
passwords that can be easily remembered.
Poor, weak passwords have the following characteristics and must not be used:
• The password contains less than twelve characters and doesn’t include any
special characters or numbers
• The password is a word found in a dictionary (English or foreign)
• The password is a common usage word such as:
o Names of family, pets, friends, co-workers, fantasy characters, etc.
o Computer terms and names, commands, sites, companies, hardware,
software.
o Birthdays and other personal information such as addresses and
phone numbers.
o Repetition such as mmmmmmmm1
o Hashtags and profile names ie anything in the public domain
o Common passphrases found on the internet such as nursery rhymes,
song names, slogans etc.
o Word or number patterns like aaabbbcc, zyxwvuts, 123321, etc.
o Keyboard sequences like qwerty, asdfghjk , zxcvbnm, etc
o Any of the above spelled backwards.
o Any of the above preceded or followed by a digit (e.g., secret1,
1secret)
Creating Passwords using Passphrases
Using passphrases is a good way of constructing strong passwords and helps with
remembering them. Passwords constructed in this way, will typically consist of
letters, numbers and special characters which are used to represent the words or
meaning of a phrase. The following example describes this process:
Example
Step 1 – Choose a phrase – for example: ‘I catch the number 14 bus on Fridays’
Step 2 – Use the first character of each word: I c t n 14 b o f
Step 3 – Mix with lower and uppercase letters: iCTn14bOf
Step 4 – Incorporate special characters (such as !@#$%^&*()_+|~-=\`{}[]:";'<>?,./ )
and numbers to increase complexity. Using this method, the final password could be:
i*CTn#14bOf5
N.B. Incorporate special characters and numbers into your password in a way which
helps you to remember where they should be e.g. could be after every 2nd, 4th, or 5th
letter – or a similar ‘system’ which is meaningful to you.
Basically, the more letters, special characters and numbers used and the longer the
password containing these is, the stronger the password will be.
IMPORTANT: The above passphrase/password is an example and must NOT be
used.
Password Protection Standards
CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
7
• Do not use the same password you use for Council accounts as for other
non-Council access (e.g., personal ISP account, personal banking, online
shopping etc.).
• Do not share Council passwords with anyone, including administrative
assistants or secretaries. All passwords are to be treated as sensitive,
Confidential Council information.
• For new starters to obtain their initial network login password, the new starter
is instructed by their line manager to contact the ICT Service Desk to verbally
provide a ‘onetime’ use password which must be reset upon first login.
• Where a member of staff forgets their current network password this can be
reset by contacting the ICT Service Desk. Following a security check, the ICT
Service Desk staff will reset existing users’ network password by verbally
providing the user with a ‘onetime’ use password.
List of "Don’ts":
• Don't reveal a password over the phone to ANYONE - unless relaying
information on temporary passwords which are changed immediately
• Don’t write passwords down and store them anywhere in your office
• Don't reveal a password in an email message - unless relaying information on
temporary passwords which are changed immediately
• Don't reveal a password to your line manager
• Don't talk about a password in front of others
• Don't hint at the format of a password (e.g., "my family name")
• Don't reveal a password on questionnaires or security forms
• Don't share a password with family members
• Don't reveal a password to co-workers while on holiday
Additional Information
• If someone demands a password, refer them to this document and request
that they call the Service Desk.
• Do not use the "Remember Password" feature of applications (e.g., Internet
Explorer, SAP etc…).
• Do not store passwords in a file on ANY computer system (including mobile
devices or similar) without encryption.
• Change passwords at least once every 180 days (with the exception of
system-level passwords which must be changed quarterly). The
recommended change interval is every four months.
• If an account or password is suspected to have been compromised, report the
incident as soon as possible to the Service Desk or via one of the other
methods as described in the Council’s Security Incident Management Policy
and Procedures. Immediately change any/all passwords which may have
been compromised. 
CONTROLLED
V15.0 Derbyshire County Council Password Policy
8
• Password cracking or guessing will be performed on a periodic or random
basis during audit penetration tests involving 3rd party companies. If a
password is guessed or cracked during one of these scans, the user will be
required to change it immediately.
10 Application Development Standards
Application developers must ensure their programs contain the following security
precautions.
Applications:
• Should support authentication of individual users, not groups.
• Should not store passwords in clear text or in any easily reversible form.
• Should provide role management functionality, such that one user can take
over the functions of another without having to know the other's password.
• Should support TACACS+ , RADIUS and/or X.509 with LDAP security
retrieval, wherever possible.

This document is owned by the Information Governance Group and forms part
of the Council's ISMS Policy and as such, must be fully complied with.