City of Jonesboro
Password Policy Created: 9/27/2017
Section of: Corporate Security Policies Target Audience: Users, Technical
CONFIDENTIAL Page 1 of 4
Password Policy Confidential
City of Jonesboro is hereinafter referred to as "the company."
1.0 Overview
A solid password policy is perhaps the most important security control an organization can
employ. Since the responsibility for choosing good passwords falls on the users, a detailed and
easy-to-understand policy is essential.
2.0 Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to specify guidelines for use of passwords. Most importantly, this
policy will help users understand why strong passwords are a necessity, and help them create
passwords that are both secure and useable. Lastly, this policy will educate users on the secure
use of passwords.
3.0 Scope
This policy applies to any person who is provided an account on the organization's network or
systems, including: employees, guests, contractors, partners, vendors, etc.
4.0 Policy
4.1 Construction
The best security against a password incident is simple: following a sound password construction
strategy. The organization mandates that users adhere to the following guidelines on password
construction:
• Passwords should be at least 8 characters
• A password history is enforced. Meaning a user cannot use the last 24 passwords they
has set in the past.
• Passwords should be comprised of a mix of letters, numbers and special characters
(punctuation marks and symbols)
City of Jonesboro
Password Policy Created: 9/27/2017
Section of: Corporate Security Policies Target Audience: Users, Technical
CONFIDENTIAL Page 2 of 4
Password Policy Confidential
• Passwords should be comprised of a mix of upper and lower case characters
• Passwords should not be comprised of, or otherwise utilize, words that can be found in a
dictionary
• Passwords should not be comprised of an obvious keyboard sequence (i.e., qwerty)
• Passwords should not include "guessable" data such as personal information about
yourself, your spouse, your pet, your children, birthdays, addresses, phone numbers, locations,
etc.
Creating and remembering strong passwords does not have to be difficult. Substituting numbers
for letters is a common way to introduce extra characters - a '3' can be used for an 'E,' a '4' can be
used for an 'A,' or a '0' for an 'O.' Symbols can be introduced this way as well, for example an 'i'
can be changed to a '!.'
Another way to create an easy-to-remember strong password is to think of a sentence, and then
use the first letter of each word as a password. The sentence: 'The quick brown fox jumps over
the lazy dog!' easily becomes the password 'Tqbfjotld!'. Of course, users may need to add
additional characters and symbols required by the Password Policy, but this technique will help
make strong passwords easier for users to remember.
4.2 Confidentiality
Passwords should be considered confidential data and treated with the same discretion as any of
the organization's proprietary information. The following guidelines apply to the confidentiality
of organization passwords:
• Users must not disclose their passwords to anyone
• Users must not share their passwords with others (co-workers, supervisors, family, etc.)
• Users must not write down their passwords and leave them unsecured
• Users must not check the "save password" box when authenticating to applications
• Users must not use the same password for different systems and/or accounts
• Users must not send passwords via email 
City of Jonesboro
Password Policy Created: 9/27/2017
Section of: Corporate Security Policies Target Audience: Users, Technical
CONFIDENTIAL Page 3 of 4
Password Policy Confidential
• Users must not re-use passwords
4.3 Change Frequency
In order to maintain good security, passwords should be periodically changed. This limits the
damage an attacker can do as well as helps to frustrate brute force attempts. At a minimum,
users must change passwords every 90 days. The organization may use software that enforces
this policy by expiring users' passwords after this time period. Once a password has been
changed it cannot be changed again for 18 days.
4.4 Incident Reporting
Since compromise of a single password can have a catastrophic impact on network security, it is
the user’s responsibility to immediately report any suspicious activity involving his or her
passwords to the IT Manager. Any request for passwords over the phone or email, whether the
request came from organization personnel or not, should be expediently reported. When a
password is suspected to have been compromised the IT Manager will request that the user, or
users, change all his or her passwords.
4.5 Applicability of Other Policies
This document is part of the organization's cohesive set of security policies. Other policies may
apply to the topics covered in this document and as such the applicable policies should be
reviewed as needed.
5.0 Enforcement
This policy will be enforced by the IT Manager and/or Executive Team. Violations may result in
disciplinary action, which may include suspension, restriction of access, or more severe penalties
up to and including termination of employment. Where illegal activities or theft of company
property (physical or intellectual) are suspected, the company may report such activities to the
applicable authorities.
6.0 Definitions
Authentication A security method used to verify the identity of a user and authorize access to a
system or network.
City of Jonesboro
Password Policy Created: 9/27/2017
Section of: Corporate Security Policies Target Audience: Users, Technical
CONFIDENTIAL Page 4 of 4
Password Policy Confidential
Password A sequence of characters that is used to authenticate a user to a file, computer,
network, or other device. Also known as a passphrase or passcode.
Two Factor Authentication A means of authenticating a user that utilizes two methods:
something the user has, and something the user knows. Examples are smart cards, tokens, or
biometrics, in combination with a password.
7.0 Revision History
Revision 1.0, 9/27/2017