Tennessee State University – Information Technology Policy
XIV. Password Policy (revised 5/2009)
Passwords are an important aspect of computer security. They are the front line of
protection for user accounts. A poorly constructed password may result in the
compromise of an e-mail or computer access account or even the entire TSU network.
All TSU students, employees, contractors, and vendors with access to TSU computer and
network systems are responsible for taking the appropriate steps, as outlined in this policy
to select and secure their passwords.
This password policy will apply to the following systems: the TSU network, TSU
wireless network, myTSU, Exchange e-mail, TSU website accounts, screen saver
protection, SciQuest purchasing system, eLearn (D2L) system, and INB Banner, and any
other computing or network resource used on the TSU campus. The strong password
policy may not be enforced on all systems simultaneously but as time and platform
specific strong password policies can be applied.
This policy establishes the requirements for creating strong passwords, the protection and
management of passwords, and the frequency that passwords are to be changed.
Creation of Strong Passwords
The use of strong passwords is necessary to thwart would be computer hackers
attempting to “guess” your password using what are known as “password crack”
programs.
Strong password construction criteria includes:
 Must contain a minimum of eight characters
 Must use a combination of upper and lower case letters
 Must use at least one numeric and one special character. e.g., 0-9,
 !@#$%^&*()_+|~- =\`{}[]:";'<>?,./)
 Must not be a word in any language, slang, dialect, jargon, etc.
 Must not be based on personal information, names of family, etc.
Password Management and Protection
 Passwords must not be inserted into email messages or other forms of electronic
communication.
 Do not use the same password for TSU accounts as for other non-TSU access (e.g.,
personal ISP account, option trading, benefits, etc.).
 Do not share TSU passwords with anyone, including administrative assistants or
secretaries. All passwords are to be treated as sensitive, Confidential TSU
information
 Passwords should never be written down or stored on-line
 Do not reveal a password over the phone to ANYONE
 Do not reveal a password in an email message
 Do not reveal a password to your boss
 Do not talk about a password in front of others
 Do not hint at the format of a password (e.g., "my family name")
 Do not reveal a password on questionnaires or security forms
 Do not share a password with family members
 Do not reveal a password to co-workers while on vacation
 Do not use the "Remember Password" feature of applications (e.g. Outlook) that
remembers your password when the username is entered.
 Do not write passwords down and store passwords anywhere in your office
 Do not store passwords in a file on ANY computer system including mobile devices
without encryption
 Change passwords at least once every six months 
Password Reset Frequency
Passwords must be changed at least every six months. Some systems periodically force
user password resets by expiring the password.
General Password Construction Guidelines
Weak passwords have the following characteristics:
 Contains less than eight characters
 Forms a word found in a dictionary (English or foreign) or is a common usage word
such as:
o Names of family, pets, friends, co-workers, fantasy characters, etc.
o Computer terms and names, commands, sites, companies, hardware, software.
o The words "TSU" or any derivation
o Birthdays and other personal information such as addresses and phone
numbers.
o Word or number patterns like aaabbb, qwerty, zyxwvuts, 123321
 Uses any of the words referenced above spelled backwards
 Uses any of the above preceded or followed by a single numeric digit (e.g., secret1,
1secret)
Strong passwords have the following characteristics:
 Contain both upper and lower case characters (e.g., a-z, A-Z)
 Have digits and punctuation characters as well as letters e.g., 0-9, !@#$%^&*()_+|~-
=\`{}[]:";'<>?,./)
 Are at least eight alphanumeric characters long.
 Not a word in any language, slang, dialect, jargon, etc.
 Not based on personal information, names of family, etc.
If a password compromise is suspected, report the incident to CIT and change all
passwords.
If someone demands a password, refer them to this document or have them call the
Helpdesk. (615-963-7777)
Techniques for creating and remembering strong passwords
Try to create passwords that can be easily remembered. One way to do this is to create a
password based on a song title, affirmation, or other phrase. For example, the phrase
might be: "This May Be One Way To Remember" and the password could be:
"TmB1w2R!" or "Tmb1W>r~" or some other variation.